# It's otterly intuitive
Otterly JS is a frontend javascript framework built to be small, highly customizable and intuitive.

The core of otterly JS are units of code attached to HTML elements. We can then add event-handlers within that unit. This looks like:

```html
<div data-unit="Logger">
	<p data-on="click->log['Hi!']"> click me! </div>
</div>
```

But why stop there? Otterly offers much more. We have AJAX and form helpers, as well as Single Page Application functionality.

- We are in Version 3.0.1, the library works well and I use it regularly! You may run into some issues but its mostly stable. Note that testing is still wanting, so issues may be encountered. Some minor changes may still occur.
- The framework will stay small, understandable and hackable! This does mean Defining alternate behavior yourself when needed.

## Compared to stimulus js...
Otterly JS is motivated by my experience using stimulus JS. Some issues I had were:
1. StimulusJS does not have AJAX or Single Page Application functionality. Which is fine - you can get it elsewhere or write your own. The otterly framework however, is meant to be small but fierce (like an otter. Get it? Otterly Javascript? No?) .
2. in Stimulus, elements can have many controllers, [and accessing them is... complicated](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/reference/outlets). In otterly js elements have only one "unit" (the controller analog) that you access like this:
```javascript
let unit = element._unit
```
3. StimulusJS has some "extra" features which I personally Dont like. Like [targets](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/reference/targets) (just use a querySelector) or [values ](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/reference/values) (just use data-attributes). In many ways stimulus js makes its life difficult by reimplementing existing functionality - or worrying about completely seperating controllers from elements for the niche case in which an element has two controllers.

## Get Your Javascript Kung Fu on 🥋
otterly js relys on previous knowlege of the following javascript information. If you dont know, [mdn](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/) is the best reference for javascript.
- [closest, querySelector and querySelectorAll](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document/querySelector)
- [binds (I suggest using liberally)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Function/bind)
- [events, currentTarget, addEventListener, etc](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Event)
- creating global variables by setting them to the [window](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window)
- [data attributes and the dataset accessor](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Howto/Use_data_attributes)
- [Promises](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise)

## Setup
Install [otterly as an npm package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@luketclancy/otterly) by adding to it your package manager:
```bash
npm i @luketclancy/otterly
```

Here is an example entry setup for your JS with Otterly:
```javascript
import {Otty, AfterDive, UnitHandler, Generic, Debug} from 'otterly'

let csrfSelector = 'meta[name="csrf-token"]'
let csrfSendAs = 'X-CSRF-Token'
let isDev = true

//Set up otty as a global variable named otty, along with various settings.
//AfterDive is set as the response handling class for the otty.dive method.
window.otty = Otty.init(isDev, AfterDive, csrfSelector, csrfSendAs)

//Set up units, events and shortcuts. Add your units to this list. Generic is set as the default the other units are built on
otty.unitHandler = UnitHandler.init(Generic, [Generic, Debug])

//Optional SPA navigation.
otty.handleNavigation()
```
## Interacting with the DOM [(how does it work?)](https://github.com/LukeClancy/otterly/blob/main/unit_handler.js)
### Units
Units underpin otterlyjs's interaction with the DOM. This is the unit I used to syntax highlight this text block:
```javascript
export default {
	unitName: "Syntax",
	onConnected: function(){
		let lang = this.element.dataset.language
		let txt = this.element.innerText
		let out = otty.highlighter.highlight(txt, {language: lang})
		this.el.innerHTML = out.value
	}
}
```
I then import it and add it to the UnitHandler in the setup
```javascript
import {Syntax} from "./js/units/Syntax"
//setup otty.highligher here...
otty.unitHandler = UnitHandler.init(Generic, [Generic, Debug, Syntax])
```
I can invoke the unit in the html with the data-unit attribute
```html
<code data-unit="Syntax" data-language='javascript'>
	let a = "otterly"
</code>
```
*In niche scenarios, if I add multiple unit names, the units will be merged into one. This should not be used regularly*

```html
<code data-unit="Logger Syntax" data-language='javascript'>
//equivilent to Object.assign({}, Generic, Logger, Syntax).
//I know 'Logger' doesn't use data-language, and Syntax only uses onConnected, so this should be fine.
</code>
```

Base Functions:
##### unitConnected
Overridable function for when unit is connected.
##### unitRemoved
Overridable function for when unit is removed.
##### onConnected
Function for when unit is connected, If there are multiple units assigned, each units's onConnected function will be called in sequence
##### onRemoved
similar to onConnected but for when the unit is removed.
##### relevantData(e)
collects the dataset of the unit's element aswell as the unit's id (as unitId). If an event is provided, collects the currentTargets dataset and id as (submitterId)
##### dive (AKA the AJAX function)
 an event function for AJAX. It is used to send the relevantData(e) above to a url. Optionally, it can also send inputs. It then accepts back JSON, which determines what actions it takes in the AfterDive class. For example:
 
```html
	<div data-unit='Generic' data-on="click->dive" data-url="/test"> </div>
```
and if one wanted to intercept a form to validate inputs and create a record before leaving the page...
```html
<form data-unit='Generic' data-on="submit->dive" data-url="/test">
	<button type='submit' name='otterCount' value=5> OK! </button>
</form>

<!-- this also works using a div pretending to be a form ( which helps when you need interactive elements within a form ) -->
 <div data-unit='Generic' data-on='submit->dive[{"withform": true}]' data-url="/test">
	<button type='submit' name='otterCount' value=5> OK! </button>
</div>

<!-- or this which ignores standard form inputs altogether for a simpler experience -->
 <div data-unit='Generic' data-url="/test" data-otter-count="5" >
	<button class="btn" data-on="click->dive"> OK! </button>
</div>

```
dive can then accept a json response like this from the server:
```json
[{
	"morph": {
		"html": "<div id='test'><h1> HI! </h1></div>",
		"id": "test"
	}
}, {
	"log": "tested!!"
}]
```
and acts upon that json as defined in the AfterDive class. I intercept all my forms, as I do not want to lose input values before I leave the page. If the creation/update was successfull, I can return this to send the user to the record they created:
```json
{"redirect": "https://the.path/to/the/record/they.made"}
```

In special circumstances, you can customize how dive acts:
- limit repeat requests (like double clicks sending two forms for instance): ```'click->dive[{"behavior": "limit", "waitTime": 1000}]'```
- stagger numerous events, while keeping data up to date. Good for search bars: ```'click->dive[{"behavior": "stagger", "stagger": 500}]'```
- repeat events eternally: ```'click->dive[{"behavior": "repeat", "waitTime": 500}]'```
	- note that the following server response will stop repeat dives: ```json '[{"returning": "STOP"}]```
	- repeat dives will also stop on page url changes.

notes:
- dive will treat the following data variables specially: data-url, data-method, data-csrf-content, data-csrf-header, data-csrf-selector, data-confirm.
- the following data-variables wont work as they are used internally: data-with-credentials, data-e, data-submitter, data-form-info, data-xhr-change-f, data-base-element
- the "withform" option, outside of input elements, also replicates functionality of the following form attributes : "action", "formaction", "method", "formmethod". There is special functionality for the event's currentTarget, where it's values take priority.
- if a "data-method", "method", or "formmethod" is not active, dive reverts to the "POST" method.
- by default dive uses e.preventDefault(). You can disable this with the "allowDefault" option (Useful for while-typing search bar results for instance).

#### untested functions
- childUnits(unitc): Gets all child units, optionally with an identifier.
- childUnitsDirect(unitc): Gets all direct child units, optionally with an identifier.
- childUnitsFirstLayer(unitc): Gets all child units who dont have a unit between. Optionally with an identifier.
- parentUnit(unitc): Gets the first pasrentUnit, optionally with an identifying name.
- addUnitEvent/removeUnitEvent/unitEvents: internal event tracking for data-on functionality. Maybe usefull for debugging?

###  Events, the Data-On Property:

The event handling of otterlyjs. They are attached to an element like this:
```html
<div data-unit='Generic' data-on="click->dive" data-url="/test">
```

the data-on string is made up of four parts, where two are optional.
1. the event name: what action will make up the event?
2. [optional] the unit name: what unit type the function belongs to. By default we assume the function belongs to the closest unit.
3. the function name: What function will the event listener call?
4. [optional] bind arguments (json): by adding brackets to the end of the function, otterly will parse those brackets as json, and add any elements as additional arguments to the function. See [arg1...argN here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_objects/Function/bind)

bind arguments are good at quick functionality and options, but that data can not be changed in the html. Due to this, data attributes are often but not always prefered..

```
1       2        3        4
click->PostCard#comment[{"withform": true}]

1        3
click->comment
```

Here is a rough idea of how this works, with 'element' being and element with a data-on attribute
```javascript
//click->dive
let unit = element.closest('[data-unit]')._unit
let dive = unit.dive.bind(unit)
element.addEventListener('click', dive )

//click->dive[{input: true}]
let unit = element.closest('[data-unit]')._unit
let dive = unit.dive.bind(unit, {input: true})
element.addEventListener('click', dive)

//click->PostCard#dive[{input: true}]
let unit = element.closest("[data-unit~='PostCard']")._unit
let dive = unit.dive.bind(unit, {input: true})
element.addEventListener('click', dive)
```

There are two special event values:
- _parse: this will run the method as soon as the data-on attribute is parsed.
- _remove: this will run the method as soon as this data-on event is removed.
- ex:

```
I use the following in a recovery step in midflip to check if they have clicked an email link yet.

data-on='_parse->dive[{"behavior": "repeat"}]'
```

### Shortcuts (for when you write one unit too many)
the UnitHandler defines a couple useful shortcuts. In my opinion it makes things easier to read, and likely makes file sizes shorter. You dont have to use them though, they are purely optional! Only for highly utilized functions:
```javascript
event.currentTarget.dataset.potatoes = this.element.querySelector('#potatoCount').dataset.potatoes
//into
event.ct.ds.potatoes = this.el.qs('#potatoCount').ds.potatoes
```
- Events:
	- ct: currentTarget
- HTMLElements:
	- ds: dataset
	- qs: querySelector
	- qsa: querySelectorAll
	- getA: getAttribute
	- setA: setAttribute
	- cl: classList
- document element:
	- qs: querySelector
	- qsa: querySelectorAll
- units:
	- el: element

## AfterDive
Navigate to the unit's dive function above to see how to trigger a dive.

AfterDive is a class containing functions defining how to treat json that is returned from a dive. Feel free to add your own functionality.

- log: logs whatever is passed ex: {log: "hi!"}
- reload: reloads the page ex: {reload: true}
- redirect: redirects to a page using SPA functionality. Useful in form validation. ex: {redirect: "/"}
- insert: inserts into the dom ex: {insert: {:html, [:position](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/insertAdjacentHTML), :selector or :id}}
- morph: morphs an element ex: {morph: {:html, :selector or id, :permanent, :ignore}}
- remove: removes an element ex: {remove: {:id or :selector}}
- replace: replaces an element ex: {replace: {:html, :id or :selector, :childrenOnly}}
- innerHtml: replaces innerHtml ex: {innerHtml: {:html, :selector or :id} }
- eval: runs some code. ex: {eval: {:code, :data (json), :selector}}. This is what it actually does:
- returning: returns this data back to the calling function.
```javascript
let x = Function("data", "selector", 'baseElement', 'submitter', `"use strict"; ${data['code']};`)(data, selector, this.baseElement, this.submitter)
```
- setData: sets data attributes on the base element: {setData: { ".card": {open: 'false'}}}

## Otty
otty is the global class instance that we assigned to the widow during our setup.
here are some methods on it:
- obj_to_fd(formInfo, [optional] FormData base object): Converts formInfo to a FormData instance. Optionally adds on to pre-existing formData
- sendsXHR(opts): Promise wrapped and abstracted xhr request. 
- dive(opts): the non-event based counterpart to the unit's dive function. Promise wrapped.
- isLocalUrl(url, [optional] subdomainAccuracy = -2): returns true if the url is equal to / a subdomain of window.location.hostname. For instance:
```javascript
//assume hostname = 'a.b.c'
isLocalUrl('d.b.c') // true
isLocalUrl('d.b.c', -3) //false
isLocalUrl('c', -1) //true
```
- xss pass: determines what domains will cause a dive to throw an error (beyond the browser built in controls). Defaults to allowing only isLocalUrl(url, -2)
- stopError(func): error catcher & logger used to stop error propogation when running unit functions, and in some other areas of the framework. See the otty.log function.
- log(e): pushes error data onto otty.logData. Planning for the capability to push the data to the server after. Consider overriding to put in your own logging logic.

## Otty Polling
Polling behavior requires some backend infrustructure which is not currently in a sharable state.

- subscribeToPoll(queues, pollInfo, waitTime, pollPath, subPath)
  - queues refer to what you are subscribing to, for instance, a conversation or just a user.
  - pollInfo has information about your queues, for instance, a conversation ID.
  - waitTime is in milliseconds, I suggest 5000
  - pollPath is what route to POST polling to.
  - subPath is what route to POST poll subscriptions to.

subscribeToPoll should autherize the user for the queues provided. subscribeToPoll uses an otty dive. The otty dive should return an encrypted string that contains authentication and queue information. This information will be passed to the poll method as the 'otty-store' field. Note that only one polling subscription can exist at a time, but you can add multiple queues to each subscription.

- Your poll route:
	Polls can return muliple different responses:
	-  when nothing is going on: `{returning: "no_updates"}`
	- when the poll needs to be re-authenticated: `{returning: "should_resub"}`
	- when there are updates: `[{morph: {...},}, {returning: "[YOUR ENCRYPTED STORE STRING]"}]`

If one is having issues with users getting repeat dive commands by doing an action, and then having a poll re-do the action, you can add a dive_id to that action to make sure it does not repeat: {morph: {...}, dive_id: 8470175}.

Otty polling requires some backend work. [Here is a partial example in ruby](https://gist.github.com/LukeClancy/e583cbc40d89fa5ea8af5402fe0bc922).

### SPA
These are the SPA functions on Otty.
- handleNavigation(opts): Enable navigation handling.
        options:
        - navigationReplaces: a fallback style querySelector list for what document navigation replaces. Default = ['body]. For example:
                - ['.content', 'body'] will replace the div with the 'content' class if available on both the current document and the new document we navigated to.
                - [['.content', '.navbar'], 'body'] will replace both the content area and the navbar area. Unless one of them is missing, in which case it will fall back to the body.
- goto(url, opts}): follow url using SPA functionality.
        options:
        - reload: stop otty from pushing to the history stack. Defaults to false
- linkClickedF: an internal method that deals with how clicked links are handled. Note that setting "data-native-href" will prevent links from using otty, causing a reload.

```html
<a href="/page" data-native-href> go to page </a>
```